.. title: experimenting with pitch detection
.. slug: experimenting-with-pitch-detection
.. date: 2009/09/28 16:19:08
.. tags: 
.. link: 
.. description: 


Last weekend I found about the aubio project. In their own words:

    aubio is a library for audio labelling. Its features include
    segmenting a sound file before each of its attacks, performing pitch
    detection, tapping the beat and producing midi streams from live
    audio. [...]

In particular, one interesting piece of code is aubionotes. This
script analyzes audio data and produces a midi output stream from it
(what I was looking for!). I tried it out, but it turns that it wasn't
as straightforward as I would have liked, because it works on top of
the Jack audio server. What it does is to provide an audio input and a
midi output, and transforms any audio data received into a midi
stream.

I have been struggling against it until I realized how it was supposed
to work (naturally, I came up with the idea on the way to work, so I
had to wait the whole day to try it out). As it happens, I was on the
(wrong) assumption that aubionotes would take the microphone input
directly. It was after I fully understood how it wanted to interact
with jack that I came to realize that I needed to use some software
that would communicate with jack. So right after work I installed
alsaplayer, recorded some audio, launched jack, launched aubionotes,
connected mi midi keyboard, plugged everything together using qjackctl
connections panel, and pressed 'play'. Oh what a joy! Midi notes were
being played on my keyboard, trying to mimic what I had been singing.
Even though a lot of extra notes were being played, I guess that's
alright for a first experiment (and can be considered noise), the
general idea of the tune I had sung could be heared being played in
the keyboard.

Considering all the processing involved in order to convert voice to
midi notes, I call this first experiment a success.

Now I have to figure out how to make jack use my microphone directly
to capture live audio, so I don't have to pre-record it.
