.. title: dual monitor management heaven
.. slug: dual-monitor-management-heaven
.. date: 2011/05/24 17:29:15
.. tags: 
.. link: 
.. description: 


For some time now I have been struggling to find a non-brain-dead way of
managing my dual-monitor setup.

I have a laptop and an external monitor, and while it's fairly easy to
configure X to extend the virtual desktop across both (using the
nvidia-settings tool, as the proprietary drivers don't cope well with the
standard monitor management tool in Ubuntu), it was always a hassle when you
need to disconnect your laptop and move away from your desktop; most of your
windows would remain hidden from view in the "other" monitor, and you had to
resort to hacky ways of letting X know: "I now have just 1 monitor so please
adjust my settings".

Today I found a very nice tool that handles this problem very well:
autorandr, you just made it to the list of my favorite tools.

autorandr lets you save a given screen configuration into a profile which can
be enabled/disabled on demand. It uses disper or xrandr underneath to do the
dirty work of configuring your monitors/screens.

What I did was basically::

    1. Configure my screens as I have them usually at home (external monitor
       is primary screen + laptop extends to the right)

    disper -d CRT-0,DFP-0 -r 1680x1050,1440x900 -e -t right

    2. Save that configuration as a profile called "dual"

    auto-disper --save dual

    3. Configure my screens so that the laptop is the only available monitor

    disper -d DFP-0 -r 1440x900 -s

    4. Save that configuration as a profile called "laptop" (I disconnected
       my external monitor to make sure the tool only sees the laptop monitor)

    auto-disper --save laptop

    5. Bound the "auto-disper --change" command to a key so that when I
       unplug the external monitor I can just run that and auto-disper will
       adjust the screen configuration to match the the hardware profile.

Now, whenever I plug the external monitor in or out I can just hit that key
combination and my screens will get correctly configured!

Easy! :)

What I'd like to figure out next is how to have the tool automatically detect
such events (external monitor plug in/out) and run the auto-disper command
automatically.

.. _autorandr: https://github.com/wertarbyte/autorandr
.. _disper: http://willem.engen.nl/projects/disper
